CONSTITUTION OF INDIA — PART III: FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS

ARTICLE 12 — DEFINITION OF STATE
The term "State" includes the Government and Parliament of India, the Government and Legislature of each State, and all local and other authorities within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India.

ARTICLE 13 — LAWS INCONSISTENT WITH FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS
(1) All laws in force in the territory of India immediately before the commencement of the Constitution, in so far as they are inconsistent with the provisions of this Part, shall, to the extent of such inconsistency, be void.
(2) The State shall not make any law which takes away or abridges the rights conferred by this Part and any law made in contravention of this clause shall, to the extent of the contravention, be void.

RIGHT TO EQUALITY (Articles 14-18)

ARTICLE 14 — EQUALITY BEFORE LAW
The State shall not deny to any person equality before the law or the equal protection of the laws within the territory of India.

ARTICLE 15 — PROHIBITION OF DISCRIMINATION
(1) The State shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them.
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them, be subject to any disability, liability, restriction or condition with regard to:
(a) access to shops, public restaurants, hotels and places of public entertainment;
(b) the use of wells, tanks, bathing ghats, roads and places of public resort maintained wholly or partly out of State funds.
(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any special provision for women and children.
(4) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any special provision for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.
(5) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making special provision for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes in relation to their admission to educational institutions including private educational institutions.

ARTICLE 16 — EQUALITY OF OPPORTUNITY IN PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT
(1) There shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to employment or appointment to any office under the State.
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place of birth, residence or any of them, be ineligible for, or discriminated against in respect of, any employment or office under the State.
(4) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens which, in the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the services under the State.
(4A) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision for reservation in matters of promotion to any class or classes of posts in the services under the State in favour of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.
(4B) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from considering any unfilled vacancies of a year which are reserved for being filled up in that year in accordance with any provision for reservation made under clause (4) or clause (4A) as a separate class of vacancies to be filled up in any succeeding year or years.

ARTICLE 17 — ABOLITION OF UNTOUCHABILITY
"Untouchability" is abolished and its practice in any form is forbidden. The enforcement of any disability arising out of "Untouchability" shall be an offence punishable in accordance with law.

ARTICLE 18 — ABOLITION OF TITLES
(1) No title, not being a military or academic distinction, shall be conferred by the State.
(2) No citizen of India shall accept any title from any foreign State.

RIGHT TO FREEDOM (Articles 19-22)

ARTICLE 19 — PROTECTION OF CERTAIN RIGHTS REGARDING FREEDOM OF SPEECH, ETC.
(1) All citizens shall have the right—
(a) to freedom of speech and expression;
(b) to assemble peaceably and without arms;
(c) to form associations or unions or co-operative societies;
(d) to move freely throughout the territory of India;
(e) to reside and settle in any part of the territory of India;
(g) to practise any profession, or to carry on any occupation, trade or business.
(2) Reasonable restrictions can be imposed on these rights in the interests of sovereignty and integrity of India, security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order, decency or morality, or in relation to contempt of court, defamation or incitement to an offence.

ARTICLE 20 — PROTECTION IN RESPECT OF CONVICTION FOR OFFENCES
(1) No person shall be convicted of any offence except for violation of a law in force at the time of the commission of the Act charged as an offence, nor be subjected to a penalty greater than that which might have been inflicted under the law in force at the time of the commission of the offence (no ex post facto law).
(2) No person shall be prosecuted and punished for the same offence more than once (double jeopardy protection).
(3) No person accused of any offence shall be compelled to be a witness against himself (right against self-incrimination).

ARTICLE 21 — PROTECTION OF LIFE AND PERSONAL LIBERTY
No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to procedure established by law.
This article has been expansively interpreted to include:
- Right to live with dignity
- Right to livelihood
- Right to education (up to age 14, also Article 21A)
- Right to health and medical care
- Right to clean environment
- Right to privacy (Puttaswamy judgment, 2017)
- Right to shelter
- Right to legal aid
- Right to speedy trial
- Right to clean drinking water
- Right against solitary confinement
- Right to travel abroad
- Right to sleep
- Right against handcuffing
- Right against delayed execution
- Right against custodial violence and torture

ARTICLE 21A — RIGHT TO EDUCATION
The State shall provide free and compulsory education to all children of the age of six to fourteen years in such manner as the State may, by law, determine.

ARTICLE 22 — PROTECTION AGAINST ARREST AND DETENTION
(1) No person who is arrested shall be detained in custody without being informed, as soon as may be, of the grounds for such arrest.
(2) Every person who is arrested shall be produced before the nearest magistrate within a period of twenty-four hours of such arrest.
(3) No person arrested shall be detained beyond twenty-four hours without the authority of a magistrate.
(4) No law providing for preventive detention shall authorise the detention of a person for a longer period than three months unless an Advisory Board reports that there is sufficient cause for such detention.

RIGHT AGAINST EXPLOITATION (Articles 23-24)

ARTICLE 23 — PROHIBITION OF TRAFFIC IN HUMAN BEINGS AND FORCED LABOUR
(1) Traffic in human beings and begar (forced labour) and other similar forms of forced labour are prohibited and any contravention of this provision shall be an offence punishable in accordance with law.

ARTICLE 24 — PROHIBITION OF EMPLOYMENT OF CHILDREN IN FACTORIES
No child below the age of fourteen years shall be employed to work in any factory or mine or engaged in any other hazardous employment.

RIGHT TO FREEDOM OF RELIGION (Articles 25-28)

ARTICLE 25 — FREEDOM OF CONSCIENCE AND FREE PROFESSION, PRACTICE AND PROPAGATION OF RELIGION
(1) Subject to public order, morality and health, all persons are equally entitled to freedom of conscience and the right freely to profess, practise and propagate religion.
(2) Nothing in this article shall affect the operation of any existing law or prevent the State from making any law—
(a) regulating or restricting any economic, financial, political or other secular activity which may be associated with religious practice;
(b) providing for social welfare and reform or the throwing open of Hindu religious institutions of a public character to all classes and sections of Hindus.

ARTICLE 26 — FREEDOM TO MANAGE RELIGIOUS AFFAIRS
Subject to public order, morality and health, every religious denomination shall have the right—
(a) to establish and maintain institutions for religious and charitable purposes;
(b) to manage its own affairs in matters of religion;
(c) to own and acquire movable and immovable property;
(d) to administer such property in accordance with law.

CULTURAL AND EDUCATIONAL RIGHTS (Articles 29-30)

ARTICLE 29 — PROTECTION OF INTERESTS OF MINORITIES
(1) Any section of the citizens residing in the territory of India having a distinct language, script or culture shall have the right to conserve the same.
(2) No citizen shall be denied admission into any educational institution maintained by the State or receiving aid out of State funds on grounds only of religion, race, caste, language or any of them.

ARTICLE 30 — RIGHT OF MINORITIES TO ESTABLISH AND ADMINISTER EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
(1) All minorities, whether based on religion or language, shall have the right to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice.
(1A) In making any law providing for the compulsory acquisition of any property of an educational institution established and administered by a minority, the State shall ensure that the amount fixed by or determined under such law for the acquisition of such property is such as would not restrict or abrogate the right guaranteed under this clause.

RIGHT TO CONSTITUTIONAL REMEDIES (Articles 32-35)

ARTICLE 32 — RIGHT TO CONSTITUTIONAL REMEDIES
(1) The right to move the Supreme Court by appropriate proceedings for the enforcement of the rights conferred by Part III is guaranteed.
(2) The Supreme Court shall have power to issue directions or orders or writs, including writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari.
Dr. B.R. Ambedkar called this article the "heart and soul of the Constitution."

TYPES OF WRITS:
1. Habeas Corpus — "produce the body" — used when a person is illegally detained
2. Mandamus — "we command" — used to compel a public authority to perform its duty
3. Certiorari — used to quash the order of a lower court that exceeded its jurisdiction
4. Prohibition — used to prevent a lower court from exceeding its jurisdiction
5. Quo Warranto — "by what authority" — used to question the authority of a person holding public office

ARTICLE 226 — POWER OF HIGH COURTS TO ISSUE WRITS
Every High Court shall have power to issue directions, orders or writs for the enforcement of any of the rights conferred by Part III and for any other purpose. (Note: Article 32 is only for fundamental rights in Supreme Court; Article 226 of Part V allows High Courts to issue writs for fundamental rights AND other legal rights.)
