SECTION 302 — PUNISHMENT FOR MURDER
Whoever commits murder shall be punished with death, or imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
Illustration: A shoots B with the intention of causing B's death. A commits murder.

SECTION 304 — PUNISHMENT FOR CULPABLE HOMICIDE NOT AMOUNTING TO MURDER
Whoever causes death by doing any rash or negligent act not amounting to culpable homicide, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.

SECTION 304A — DEATH CAUSED BY RASH OR NEGLIGENT ACT
Whoever causes by doing any rash or negligent act not amounting to culpable homicide, the death of any person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.

SECTION 498A — CRUELTY BY HUSBAND OR HIS RELATIVE
Whoever, being the husband or the relative of the husband of a woman, subjects such woman to cruelty shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.
Explanation: For the purposes of this section, "cruelty" means:
(a) any willful conduct which is of such a nature as is likely to cause physical or mental pain or suffering to the woman;
(b) conduct which by word, gesture or act is intended to be insulting or is known to be likely to cause mental suffering.

SECTION 406 — CRIMINAL BREACH OF TRUST
Whoever, being in any manner entrusted with property, or with any dominion over property in his capacity of a public servant or in the way of his business as a banker, merchant, factor, broker, attorney or agent, commits criminal breach of trust in respect of that property, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine.

SECTION 420 — CHEATING AND DISHONESTLY INDUCING DELIVERY OF PROPERTY
Whoever cheats and by means of the cheating induces the person deceived to deliver any property to any person, or to make, alter or destroy the whole or any part of a valuable security, or anything which is signed or sealed, in the belief that he is dealing with that person or acting as such person's agent, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.

SECTION 354 — ASSAULT OR CRIMINAL FORCE TO WOMAN WITH INTENT TO OUTRAGE HER MODESTY
Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any woman, intending to outrage or knowing it to be likely that he will, by such assault or force, outrage her modesty, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.

SECTION 375 — RAPE
A man is said to commit "rape" who, except in the case hereinafter excepted, has sexual intercourse with a woman under circumstances falling under any of the six following descriptions:
First—Against her will.
Secondly—Without her consent.
Thirdly—With her consent, when her consent has been obtained by putting her or any person in whom she is interested, in fear of death or hurt.
Fourthly—With her consent, when the man knows that he is not her husband, and that her consent is given because she believes that he is another man to whom she is or believes herself to be legally married.
